- Start Date: 2020-10-15
- Status: Progress

# Summary

Some of Neptune Web components have default and/or constant messages which needs to be localised.

This RFC describes a proposal using [react-intl](https://formatjs.io/docs/react-intl) library and Crowdin along with a custom context provider. This solution will be compatible with React or React + Angular hybrid apps/libraries it works as for client side as for server-side rendering.

# Motivation

Some of neptune web components required translations for 'default text' where we define 'default text':
 - text that is not likely to be changed.
 - text that we are able to anticipate.
 - optional text that has a default value.

A few examples of 'default text' that need to be translated:
- `aria-label` in `CloseButton` ("Close");
- `next` and `previous` button text in  `Pagination` component ("Previous" and "Next").
- default messages in `Upload` component.
- validation messages in `Field`.

# Technical Details

This RFC suggests to use:
- react-intl as API for managing translations inside components, we choose react-intl because it's based on ECMAScript Internationalization API - [`Intl`](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/JavaScript/Reference/Global_Objects/Intl) which already built into browsers, the library is widely used thus it has good community of maintainers/contributors to continue evolve and improve it.
- Crowdin as a translation vendor.
- A Custom context provider that we called `NeptuneProvider`.

`NeptuneProvider`'s main duty is to initialize `react-intl` context provider ([`RawIntlProvider`](https://formatjs.io/docs/react-intl/components/#rawintlprovider)) on the consumer side and dynamically load messages for other langues on demand (when end user uses different language from default one (English), or just changed via UI), this will save us lot of bytes in end bundle.

[Here](https://github.com/transferwise/neptune-web/pull/633/files#diff-fa11d57d55ae24aab6f002e1e3f49b34a62b3f74b065c49f477f457ae9199bf7R3-R31) you can see an initial implementation of the provider.

Note, `NeptuneProvider` can also be nested inside other providers and used next to other translations libraries (e.g retranslate).

# Usage examples

## Neptune Web usage

```js
import { useIntl, FormattedMessage } from 'react-intl';

export const SomeComponent = ({ children, ... }) => {
  // Once the component is wrapped in RawIntlProvider, via NeptuneProvider,
  // it can access the `intl` object via the `useIntl` hook.
  const intl = useIntl();
  return (
    <button
      aria-label={intl.formatMessage({ id: 'some.message' })}
      ...
    >
      <FormattedMessage id="random.message" />
      {children}
    </button>
  );
};
```

## Consumers app usage

Consumers have to wrap Neptune components in the `NeptuneProvider`. Usually this should be done once at root level component.

```js
class App {
  render() {
    return (
      <NeptuneProvider locale={'en'}>
        <head>
          <title>...</title>
        </head>
        ...
      </NeptuneProvider>
    );
  }
}
```

## Playground usage

For example if you are using Storybook as playground it is necessary to setup the env just adding a decorator that wraps your story with the provider.

```js
// This example with Storybook v5
addDecorator(...);
addDecorator((storyFn) => <NeptuneProvider locale="en">{storyFn()}</NeptuneProvider>);
```

# Crowdin integration

A Circle job is going to be added to the current workflow of PR branches. This job is going to take care of translations pushes to Crowdin ([see job example](https://app.circleci.com/pipelines/github/transferwise/neptune-web/5336/workflows/72e0c371-d39f-44cf-8933-20859a0c6b00)). 
Contributors have to manually approve this job ([Holding a Workflow/Job for a Manual Approval](https://circleci.com/docs/2.0/workflows/#holding-a-workflow-for-a-manual-approval)) to trigger it when they want push messages to Crowdin for translation.
Having this job as part of PR branch will allow Translators start working on the translations in parallel with the developers that can keep working on their changes. Ideally all PRs should be merged once all the translations are provided, to reduce the number of merges and consequent version bumps.

# Messages

## Key Naming Convention

When writing message's keys please follow the convention:

```
[np].[ComponentName].[elementName]...
```

where:
- `[np]` - stands for Neptune;
- `[ComponentName]` - component name (e.g `CloseButton`, `Pagination` etc.);
- `[elementName]` - element that receive the translation;

Each part of the key should be separated by dot.

To safe a bit of bundle file size we plan to use [`babel-plugin-react-intl-id-hash`](https://www.npmjs.com/package/babel-plugin-react-intl-id-hash) will be used to rewrite and shorten message keys.

## Storage for Translations

Default language messages (English) will be stored in JS file next to the component:

```
/inde.jx
/CloseButton.js
/CloseButton.messages.js
```

Other languages in dedicated JSON files.

# Supported Languages

- German (de)
- UK English (en)
- US English (en-US)
- Spanish (es)
- French (fr)
- Hungarian (hu)
- Italian (it)
- Japanese (ja)
- Polish (pl)
- Brazilian Portuguese (pt)
- Romanian (ro)
- Russian (ru)
- Turkish (tr)
- Hong Kong Chinese (zh-HK)
- Bulgaria (bg)
- China (zh)
- Czechoslovakia (cs)
- Finland (fi)
- Greece (el)
- Korean (ko)
- Norway (nb-NO)
- Slovakia (sk)
- Sweden (sv-SE)
- Thailand (th)

# Considerations

- We did consider implementing approach that is described in react-intl docs - [Distributing i18n-friendly libraries](https://formatjs.io/docs/guides/distribute-libraries/), but we found it not so suitable for us as it forces consumer applications use react-intl with some extra configs on consumer side.
